brett weinstein thank you for joining me
on the show man thanks for having me
i am very excited to have you so when
i'm bringing you on now in a context
that probably would have been different
so i've wanted you on the show for a
long time because
what i'm always telling people is that a
lot of my success is predicated on an
early realization that i had which is
that i'm having a biological experience
and what i mean by that is
i became obsessed with the movie the
matrix as uh what i'll say is the
dominant metaphor for my life because it
it so accurately captures the nature of
what the brain does to you so i don't
think that we're actually in a
simulation but your brain is creating a
simulation for you through which you
interact with the world and i just
thought okay well if it's sort of
focused on keeping me alive and it's not
necessarily focused on you know just
representing reality like there are this
many photons bouncing off of this object
and you know figure the rest out from
there and it's sort of
packaging it in a way
are there ways that i can reinterpret
that package that would be more
advantageous for me and so that was
initially why i got drawn to you and the
things you talk about
and then you know over the last few
months for the first time in my life um
civil war is a possibility seems real
and i always thought i saw myself as
existing outside of history and so to
now suddenly feel like hey this is
deeply uncomfortable where this is
headed that pushed me doubly down into
your world do you find are you surprised
that you and your wife became the
epicenter of all of this
um you know one has to be surprised
because for one thing the uh events are
so bizarre that for anybody to be the
center of it would be weird and you know
to be to be there is is doubly so
but um
yeah it's a very odd moment i have to
say i'm quite excited by the the two
things you use to introduce the
conversation here because
both of them are perspectives that very
few people have and you're right you
you are living in your own simulation no
matter what else might be true and that
simulation
is not quite matrix-like because it's
not designed to fool you in fact it's
designed to do the opposite but it
doesn't mean that those heuristics don't
have lots of places where they create
room for ambiguity and that ambiguity is
an increasingly large factor in modern
life because so much of what we're
encountering doesn't match what our
ancestors were were built for
so anyway it is very important to
recognize that
that that package of
of heuristics is both your greatest
asset and your greatest liability
and your second point about
about civil war i can't tell you how
many conversations a week i'm having
with people who seem to calculate that
because civil war is not common it must
not be headed our way
and i just don't understand how they're
ending up there so it's good to talk to
somebody who spotted it as a real
possibility because i'm quite sure it is
yeah the the other interesting part is
um
very few people are talking about
solutions so even somebody like myself
who's like okay well i'll always default
to the individual what can the
individual do and i identified that
pretty early on in my life as
uh the path that i was going to or maybe
the the lens through which i was going
to choose to see the world and i think
that there are um very much limitations
to that but it has served me so well
that i see it as definitely a part of
the solution
but hearing people talk about the
solution that's at a higher level a
systems level something like that it was
a true breath of fresh air to hear that
somebody had ideas there
to set the stage though i want to talk
about there's this feeling that i have
that we're in right now in terms of what
the breaks are what are the things that
could take us off the path to civil war
because right now i feel like we're
already going at such tremendous pace
and there's so much momentum i'm always
telling people in business momentum
matters
and there's so much momentum behind an
idea that i think is fundamentally um
designed to disintegrate and to
disunify everybody that then the next
question is okay well what what could
counteract that force
and there's this thing where my wife and
i will be in the middle of an argument
and i will actually call it out when it
happens where i'm like we have reached
that point now where it is impossible to
avoid a fight
and i will say it out loud brett in the
middle of the argument i will say we we
have now reached that point because
you you get so much momentum behind your
positions that until the neurochemistry
of that situation changes
you you can't re-see commonality you
can't you can't feel the desire to
connect anymore and if you don't feel
the desire to connect and you don't
behave in a way that will draw you back
together and it is so surreal to me how
you can feel that sort of click over
moment where there is some sort of
tipping point where now aggression and
anger
feeling is trumping the desire to hear
new information to sort of relax and
remember that you love this person do
you think that we've hit that tipping
point and if we have
is there something other than a fight
that can back us off well i love your
your model and i must say it mirrors uh
the way heather and i deal with things
too which is
there's a recognition i think for us it
it's it's seated in our training as as
uh animal behaviorists but
there's a lot that goes on in human
space that isn't really about the
content
right you think it's about the content
because you're human and you're you're
wired to process language because
there's so much conveyed in it but very
frequently you'll understand an argument
between people best if you turn down the
sound so you can't hear what's being
said and you just look at what's going
on and
the same thing is i think true
in the larger context where we are
watching
a battle
that is over
very standard stuff but it's full of
very modern particular
content descriptions the people who are
engaged in it think that they're
reacting to something much more specific
rather than just a general frustration
so the way out if there is one does
involve a recognition that you are being
carried along by something that you may
have an objective and a focus but that
you are being carried along with a
historical process and if you can
recognize what processes this looks like
from the past
you'll know you don't want to go this
direction it doesn't end well if enough
of us can figure that out and manage to
convey it then maybe we can overcome the
momentum as you say on the other hand i
think the the odds are are against us
yeah i think uh that's terrifying and i
hate it when you speak so
clearly and terrifyingly um because it
it is hard to argue and and on the
streets it feels
um it's unnerving that that is the the
word that i will use so when
i have from the perspective of trying to
achieve things in my life i have asked
one question over and over and over
which is all right if viktor frankl is
right and i can't control the stimulus
but i can control the response even in
the middle of a concentration camp and
that book was um just absolutely
transformational for me in terms of like
here is somebody who's lived through the
worst atrocity that i can imagine and
said ah you can predict with like
accuracy of 72 hours when somebody's
gonna die because you see them give up
on why they are suffering and he was
like if you understand there's that gap
between stimulus and response and you
hold on to that that you can make
radical change in your perspective or
the way that you interpret things which
is going to then influence your behavior
which can in his example literally keep
you alive or allow you to die so i was
like okay cool i'm i'm all for the deck
it may be stacked against anybody could
be maybe it's stacked against me maybe
it's stacked against somebody else maybe
that shifts and changes depending on the
consequence or the context
but if i can you know retain some of
this control then i can really get
somewhere and so looking at the world
through that lens and coming to this
sort of evolutionary understanding of
things as you begin to look at the
movement that's happening now
and what seems to be an innate feature
and i don't know if you'd call it a
feature or bug but the madness of crowds
and that
that oh god i forget the exact quote i'm
sure you'll you'll get really really
close but um madness is very uncommon in
the individual and basically the the
default in crowds and so what we have
now is is a crowd that is gaining
momentum and it's moving in a direction
and
getting uh other people to sort of step
out of the stream and get the
perspective on that of okay between
stimulus and response i have a
responsibility and i can do something
and so
partly because of you and like the
things you were just saying i had this
moment when when this all first kicked
off and i was like i just want to put my
head down and i just dude you you can't
imagine for for the last i mean now it's
been 20 years for the last 20 years all
i've wanted to do
is be the next disney i just want to
make rad movies and tv shows and like
inspire people and you know like really
bring something beautiful to the world
and i only want to tell one kind of
story you're not going to get a bunch of
anti-hero stuff for me like i i want to
my literally my stated mission is no one
should ever get to the age of 15 without
encountering a growth mindset and
encountering it through story because i
saying it like we're saying it now it
hits people logically but it doesn't hit
them emotionally we need narrative to
drive down to the limbic level and and
really make change do it at the age of
imprinting like i've got this whole plan
and i feel good about it and then i'm
like okay
the thought of putting my head down in
the hopes that the mob passes me by
makes me feel like a coward
and since i know the punch line of life
is exactly the following how you feel
about yourself when you're by yourself
it's all that matters
and
i have run the experiment of does wealth
solve all of your problems and wealth is
awesome but it does not solve all your
problems so
i didn't want to feel like a coward
it made me step into that okay well what
can i do at my own individual level to
begin to tease this out
so as you because you're not somebody
who's giving up so even though you have
a somewhat pessimistic view
um can you walk us through
the things that would have to be true
whether or not you think people are
willing to do it what are the things
that would have to be true for this to
stop shy of um just outright conflict
well i i see a primary obstacle which is
that those who see the hazard clearly
don't understand where the energy is
coming from and in some sense we have to
negotiate a settlement in a
in a middle ground where
um the ability to navigate is being
systematically disrupted by both sides
so you have
uh let's
call it conservative for the moment
you've got conservatives who are dubious
that the objections that the frustration
is real and is based on something that
actually requires a remedy
and then you have the uh the liberals or
i don't even want to call them liberals
because this is so illiberal the way
they're delivering it but you have the
um
the self-defined leftists delivering a
set of prescriptions that
as i've said many times before
doesn't uh seek to end oppression it
seeks to turn the tables of oppression
and worse it seeks to turn the tables of
imagined depression oppression so that
it's not even being careful about its
targeting
and what has to be
the negotiated solution has to come in
the form of a recognition
that the system is
rigged and that it is rigged in a way
that
the um the misfortune is not evenly
distributed you can predict with a
relatively high degree of certainty
where the misfortune is going to be
concentrated based on historical
patterns of oppression so can you can
you give me um the very specific
uh predictive mechanism you use is it
zip code is it ethnicity what what is it
well i would say zip code is by far the
best um because it does capture the
fraction of it that that tracks with
ethnicity but it doesn't limit it to
that and of course it isn't limited to
that so what you really have is a kind
of opportunity
hoarding
um by
what i call rent-seeking elites
oftentimes
i've heard you talk about that before
and
one of the questions i want to ask you
you had said uh because i i have
generated tremendous wealth in my life
and you said you know a lot of people
they'll they'll cr so rent seeking being
people that are sort of inserting
themselves as money managers or finance
people whatever they're not actually
creating something they're not adding
value to the system but they're
extracting a ton of value just as a
quick um thumbnail uh
but you said there are people so i've
always felt very good right cause i
built a business from the ground up we
didn't raise outside capital and we
turned it into something and from that i
created wealth and then you said there
are some people who create something
with good intentions and then they turn
into unknowingly rent seeking elites and
i was like [__] am i rent seeking so now
i'm like
what what is that next step because i
have literally dedicated my entire adult
life and i'm um sort of gambling with my
fortune that i can
uh create this narrative vehicle that
will help some percentage of people
encounter a growth mindset and improve
their life and and my mission is to make
it so your zip code is not predictive of
your future success but now i'm so
paranoid that i'm doing some rent
seeking that i don't even realize so
what does that look like like
is it just investing my money makes me
rent sinking what does that look like
yeah you're definitely doing some rent
seeking but the good news is you're not
doing it because of a defective
character you're doing it because of
the way the market is structured and
what rational behavior looks like so
walk me through what that is it you know
your investment portfolio is no doubt
invested in things that um
if you looked at the details of how they
function are just simply rent seeking um
so
uh you know
you probably don't even know you
probably are invested in some funds and
those funds you know are picking and
choosing
equities and whatever it is and uh
those
those things are having an effect on you
know they're
maybe you're invested in a
company that makes clothing and the
company that was chosen for your
portfolio is profitable and why is it
profitable because it's figured out some
way to artificially depress the wages
the people who make the close so that
when they get to the shop they're
cheaper and people buy them
so anyway there's lots of places where
you can be
involved in rent seeking just by virtue
of automatic processes in which you're
not you couldn't possibly be aware of
all the things that your money is doing
while you're not paying attention
um so there's that and then there's also
the issue probably not for you because
i've heard very clearly what you've said
here your objective
is not only laudable but it's also
i would say maybe the important leverage
point you're talking about reaching
young people you're talking about
reaching them with developmentally
relevant helpful stories that actually
empower them so my guess is
net
you're in surplus but does that mean
that everything that you're doing is
positive rather than negative in this
calculation it can't right for none of
us i'm sure i'm rent seeking too i don't
have a lot of investments but enough
that there's definitely going to be
stuff hidden there but the good news is
you can't really be
if you were to
try to figure out
what effect you're having on the world
in every detail and you were to try to
eliminate all of the negative stuff it
would take all your time and more
you wouldn't finish the job so you'd be
left
ineffective in the stuff that you're
doing that's positive
without
eliminating the negative stuff so
in some sense i don't know if you're
familiar with my personal responsibility
vortex talk
no to me
well the the short answer is that game
theoretically speaking
trying to live your principles in an
economic context doesn't make sense you
will hobble yourself you will end up in
a cabin in the woods you know
trying to eke out a living without
having negative impacts and what that
does is it reduces your influence on how
society functions
so the world becomes more ruthless as
you try to make sure that you're not
doing anything that you
you don't see as
positive relative to your values you
actually limit your influence over the
system and the system moves away from
your values rather than towards them so
the question is what is the
best use of the power and leverage you
have and for you to be delivering
narratives that empower individuals so
that they
know who they are they are better
equipped to function and making sure
that that happens in a way that uh your
zip code doesn't predict your success in
life that seems
not only incredibly noble but it also
seems like the leverage point and i
fully agree with you
conversations like this are all well and
good
they don't move civilization right they
can inform something that moves
civilization but the stuff that moves
civilization is narrative and so anyway
more power to you
um
i don't know i don't know how well that
answers the question but uh no it it
begins to pull at one thread of what
feels like a very tightly wound
ball of yarn but i think this is you
know ultimately how it begins so now
getting into
um
the thing that i always try to hold
myself to is
i i only care about what has application
in the real world and so i'm trying to
learn things chase fascinations whatever
the case may be that's actually going to
make me more capable so i'll give you a
background
or a base assumption this is maybe a
better way to say it so if somebody asks
me what's the meaning of life i have a
very quick aggressive ready answer
i don't expect other people to agree
more i think the biggest thing i want
people to take away is it is possible to
define that and then to act in
accordance so my definition is very
simple the meaning of life
is to see how much of your potential you
can translate into usable skill set
and that that to me and then you can you
know even take it one step further and
say and that skill set should be
something that's unique to you that you
care deeply about you worked your ass
off to acquire and it helps not only
yourself but other people now why do i
think that's the meaning of life because
that is as far as i can tell
given that you are having a biological
experience and your brain will kick up
neurochemistry that either feels good or
bad based on
millions of years of evolution so you're
you're stuck in that there yes you can
transcend your biology but you are in
that biology man and so fulfillment to
me is the name of the game right so
fulfillment is often born out of really
hard [__] it's doing hard things right
it is not getting things just given to
you
this is why i think the oppression
olympics is just destined to fail
because you're you're
creating a frame of reference of
victimhood of i don't have agency um
it's uh i don't know if coleman hughes
came up with this but he's certainly the
person i heard say it he was like you're
turning people into weather veins and
you're reducing the black population to
well we're pointed in whatever direction
the wind of the white man blows us in
and he was like basically [__] that
don't put me in that box i have agency
like i can do things in my own life
and so that to me is
really where you
should be focused which is how you're
going to feel about yourself and you're
by yourself which is a neurochemical
experience which is based on all the
heuristics that the brain has worked
into us
and in my interpretation of that it's
translating potential into skill set and
then putting those skills to use
beautiful
that's uh lovely and actually to me it
seems like um a
key it's a half of a puzzle that i'm
focused on and i'm i'm focused on the
other half typically but
um there is this interesting dynamic
between
conservatives and liberals
where conservatives see very clearly the
personal responsibility part of the
equation and
they often times don't see the
collective responsibility part and
liberals are exactly the inverse and so
i've i've spent a lot of time thinking
about actually the way these two pieces
of the puzzle fit together and it's it's
a you know a yin yang phenomenon
before i get to it exactly though let me
say
the weather veining i have not heard
coleman say that but i love it it's uh
it's a beautiful way of thinking about
it way i think about it is learned
helplessness
that in effect this is just training
people to be helpless because it results
in rewards being delivered and the
end point of that is fairly clear you're
just going to create a helpless needy
population and
i mean anybody who's raised kids or you
know even if you have nieces and nephews
you know how bad an idea this is right
there's no way it's going to work at a
civilization level
and let me push on that and see if you
agree why um it's going to be bad so the
reason as i hear you say that that it
seems self-evident to me that that would
become a problem is when you are a
self-perceived
i don't think this is true but when
you've created a frame of reference
which we can get into why i'm so
obsessed about frame of reference but
when you create a frame of reference
that you are helpless and needy think
back to inhuman
in any one human's
evolution not not as a population the
point at which you are most needy and
weak is when you're a child and what is
the mechanism that every child very
quickly learns gets them what they want
a tantrum right you create so much like
external pain and suffering that people
want to to calm you down by giving you
the thing that you want it's a strategy
every one of us has tried and reap
tremendous benefits and then we go out
into the world and the world slaps us
around and says
stop you're obnoxious i don't want to be
around you right jordan peterson's
saying don't let your kids do anything
that makes you dislike them i think
that's a pretty good steering mechanism
and but now like when you talk about
this horizontal movement which is one of
the more terrifying things that you say
um meaning that
this this is already permeated
everywhere and so now you called it a
sleeper cell recently and i thought that
was super apt and just way terrifying
and so you have all these people that
have learned hey tantrums are very
effective
and my entire identity is around how
effectively i can use a tantrum to get
what i want
my placement in the oppression olympics
which i say with derision right anybody
listening can see that i don't i think
that that's ineffective and and i should
state i judge everything by whether or
not what you're doing moves you towards
your goal
and i judge your goal based on whether
it will bring you fulfillment right so
it's very easy to sort of guess how i
will interpret something
so
if you create that scenario where the
only way to win is to throw a tantrum
we're doomed and so is is that or
something like that what you meant when
you say this just won't work oh
exactly and not only does it not work
for the individuals but ultimately
they're going to tear down the entire
structure because
a structure of people that
gets what they need through
effectively the kind of terrorism that
children engage in against their parents
that structure isn't capable of
producing anything so
exactly how is it going to survive in
the world
and this actually brings me to the the
other half of the uh
the very eloquent personal
responsibility
um portrayal that you you delivered a
couple minutes ago
which is
so you see the imperative as
basically taking what assets you have
and making sure you convert them at the
maximum rate into capacity that's
meaningful relative to your your values
which i agree
absolutely
but the other thing is i think we
collectively have a responsibility
to recognize
that being a human being
is
an incredible experience right it's such
a gift
and you could you know if you were any
other creature
the degree of that gift that you would
have would be
much less in the case of the next
nearest creature or none in the case of
most creatures and so we have this
amazing opportunity
and it seems to me that we have a moral
imperative to deliver that opportunity
to as many people as possible
and what that means is that actually we
have an obligation to preserve this this
really isn't about our generation and
whether we're satisfied or or anything
like that this is about how long can we
keep this running so the maximum number
of human beings has that experience and
what's more
if you are
hobbled by a cruddy educational system
if you are constrained by the
requirement that you spend your time in
a stupid job that has no meaning to you
because it's the only way that you can
afford a roof over your head and
uh get your healthcare paid for and all
of that if that's what you're obligated
to do then we're squandering your human
potential and
we should be seeking to liberate people
as much as is humanly possible so
as many generations as can be as
liberated as possible that seems to me
our collective obligation and how do you
do that well you have to enable people
individually to take advantage of
opportunities to spot them and it just
so happens that these two things fit
together rather perfectly they describe
what the objective of the whole exercise
ought to be
um so
anyway we're a long way from there you
know we have a system that just does not
do this very effectively but
we can see it from here
and uh
and then this goes to the last part we
were talking about momentum and we were
talking about
um the danger of
despair effectively recognizing that the
likelihood of us fixing the problem is
pretty small
but i always think of it in terms of
being on a i don't know a canoe or
something headed for a waterfall
at what point is the chance that you can
paddle out of the path of the waterfall
and get to shore before you go over so
low that it's not worth your time and
the answer is there is no point at which
it's so low
right if there's any chance at all that
you can get to shore a fraction of a
percent is enough giving up would be
stupid if the result of giving up is
that you go over the falls
so to me this is where we are i don't
know how likely it is that we'll succeed
but i think the thing is it just makes
sense to take the best shot you've got
and uh
sometimes you're surprised you take the
best shot you got and it's good enough
so
what the hell else are we doing right
why would we invest in anything other
than trying to
write our course and avoid another
tremendous calamity of history
yeah that's very well said and one of
the things that i think will help us in
fact one of the things i think that must
happen if we're going to
get enough people roaming in the right
direction
is
something that heather your wife dr
heather heing brought up in one of your
episodes she read directly from the book
tribe
i have a rule when you encounter
something powerful you should
immediately go into it so i literally
after hearing that quote got the book
read it that day and the punch line is
hey boys and girls like you're
you you have a two-party system which is
exactly as you just laid out right
you've got people that err on the side
of like this um
compassion empathy collective
moral obligation to lift up as much of
humanity as humanly possible and then on
the other side you've got people who are
about individual responsibility not
wanting um to be taken advantage of and
i see a very um not they don't it
doesn't break on the same lines but an
equally important dichotomy in business
which is the visionary and the
executor often known as the ceo the the
operations person
and there is friction between the two in
both cases so you have friction between
the compassion people who want to help
everybody and the people who are like
come on personal responsibility i don't
want to be taken advantage of and then
in a business you need somebody who's a
visionary and is not worried about the
consequences and just new ideas crazy
ideas big ideas and you need somebody
who's like hey [__] you have to
ground this in reality and if we just
spin off on all these crazy ideas
nothing will ever get done and it's like
i it was a huge breakthrough for me in
business when i realized
i'm i'm a visionary
because i live in it
i see it from that
perspective so again my obsession with
frame of reference so as the visionary
my frame of reference is big ideas or
how you end up building a big business
and creating all the wealth for all the
people being able to pay people salaries
and be generous and give them vacations
and all that i remember once looking out
my window and there was like 20 cars in
the parking lot and i thought [__] i've
created something that has
allowed everyone to pay for these like
that's crazy like you're really helping
people do rad [__] in their lives but
until i had respect for the need for
this other person to help me right and
there's a great quote i think it's john
ford
who said or henry ford who said
airplanes take off against the wind not
with it and the example i hear in
business a lot is you need both the kite
and the string the kite without the
string just flies off into the ether the
string without the kite just lays on the
ground so once i said okay wait a second
this is exactly what's going on in our
political discourse is you have each
side both sides are necessary so if
you're conservative and you have any
temptation to alienate or hate the other
side like you're missing the fundamental
point you are one half the equation if
it's just you it slides towards tyranny
the other side if you don't recognize
that you need the other side that it is
the the friction between the two you set
it perfectly yin yang right
if you don't understand the need for
that balance you slide off into madness
and until both sides go hey it's cool
for me to really stand for my part of
this if i show respect
and have this really insane desire to
have the other side
um
if we did that
then okay like people can say look i i'm
just i'm wired for i can't have people
stealing from me right the taxes is
theft and then the other side like we
can't let these people like starve in
the streets if they both value each
other and recognize okay this is an
interplay between the two i think we get
somewhere but we're so being forced into
these factions factions factions and
because i'm a personal responsibility
guy even though i do not consider myself
conservative at all because i'm
freakishly compassionate um
but
when i i think it
jordan peterson said it the best when he
was like when you fractionate and
fractionate and fractionate you
ultimately realize that you end up with
the ultimate fraction and that's the
individual and that's sort of where
action can be taken so i i approach it
from that standpoint but when i boil it
down to that the only thing i could see
action that i could take to sort of
bring that harmony that balance together
was to not bury my head in the sand not
um try to put up the don't hurt me wall
of platitudes and saying all the things
that i'm supposed to say
but to step out and say okay there has
to be a way forward and we have to speak
up for that
and that brings me to my
keen interest
in the unity 2020 plan um
what is it why do you think it's
realistic and does is was it born of
that that need for balance
oh man
uh so first of all i don't want to leap
right to it because you said so many
important things uh but hey we can come
back to it later if there's something
else you want to jump
a little riff well i just wanted to say
that
the
number of different realms and different
examples that we could come up with that
reflect the exact thing you just said
i mean we could go all day um just to
give you one example that has been a
focus for heather and and me
um
is
that there has been a kind of coup
inside academia where
the empiricists have
driven out the theorists and they didn't
know that that's what they were doing
but the way the university system is
funded from grant overhead prioritizes
expensive empirical work
and what this has resulted in is
basically
a science of the the cos right there's
no visionary stuff because effectively
what theory still exists at least in a
place like biology
is theory practiced by uh empiricists in
their spare time right it's not high
quality and this has resulted in a huge
amount of waste because you need
visionaries who are who are good at the
art of seeing what is there that is
hidden rather than people who are just
very focused on data data data
now as a theorist
i would never i wouldn't dream of trying
to get rid of the experimentalists
because they're so they are you know
there is no science without them but
in many places what we have where we see
dysfunction is that one side has
forgotten the necessity of the other
side the tension is where the magic
comes from and in our political context
i am very definitely
a
not only a liberal i would say i'm a
radical because i believe only radical
change will save us but i'm not a
radical because i like radical change
radical change sucks it's very dangerous
right i want to live in a world that
works so well that i get to be a
conservative that's the objective of the
exercise and if you're a progressive
that isn't looking to
create a world in which you become a
conservative then you don't understand
what you're doing right and this is
it's a fashion statement then it's not
an objective right so anyway i think
there's something tremendously deep in
what you've said and personal
responsibility man that is the place if
you're trying to improve things that's
the best bang for your buck
right that's why conservatives see it so
clearly and believe me in my
you know the last three and a half years
i've spent so much time talking to
conservatives and wow have i come to
understand what it looks like through
their eyes yes this just it pays back
you know whereas if you take the same
investment and you pointed it fixing
civilization
in general nothing happens or you create
change and it has um it has uh
unintended consequences that may even be
negative
the whole thing may be not negative so
yeah personal responsibility it's a
place it's easy to understand how people
end up focused on it because it works
quite well
but i don't want to lose sight of the
other thing because you know that's the
part that allows the personal
responsibility to work is the context in
which there's a place to deploy it it's
also the part that um
makes you
feel good at the end so i i really want
people to obsessively focus on one thing
at the end of the day you have to feel
good about yourself when you're by
yourself like that's it that that is
what you're marching towards that that
is the name of the game and um as
somebody so i generated wealth in
in a way that i think is actually very
very typical but people don't understand
it they don't understand the process of
building equity in something only to
then finally in one sort of grand moment
you go from normal um
income to whoa my life is totally
different i can go buy a mansion and
it's literally in the the snap of the
fingers so um we had built this company
and i had been working by the time we
got to that company i'd been working in
business for by the time i got my first
taste of real money was probably 15
years in so i've been working in
business for a very long time and at
first it started out sort of i wasn't
paid very well and then it was like okay
i'm making yeah great middle class then
it was upper middle class income and
then i was sort of stuck at upper middle
class income for a while and then it
dipped back down doesn't matter and then
come back to this upper middle class
income and then
in one fell swoop we sell a piece of the
company
and i just have a tremendous amount of
never have to work again can change my
family's life can you know go in any
direction i want to go moment and
because it was so i'm literally hitting
refresh refresh refresh in my banking
app because you do this call and
everybody goes we're ready to wire we're
ready to wire it yes go and then you
wait the you know whatever seven minutes
for it to hit and so just hitting
refresh and i had this amazing moment
where
i was like
the money hit and i was suddenly wealthy
and i felt exactly the same
and i was like oh my god every
insecurity i've ever had is still here
and all the joy of having to get better
and push myself and [__] suffer to
get better and like grow and adapt and
the excitement that comes along with
getting better and seeing over a period
of time like whoa looking back 10 years
like i can do stuff now that i couldn't
do before this is amazing and you go
that was actually the juice the juice
was i became a person capable of
building a company so i'm always telling
people don't try to win a championship
try to become capable of a championship
performance right i would rather be the
guy that loses the game-winning shot in
a championship but have been that guy
than have been sitting on a bench of a
championship winning team but not played
and contributed in any way because i'm
trying to feel some way about myself
right so when you talk about putting it
in that context of understanding look i
want to be a badass i want to be the
hardest core [__] that ever
lived
partly so i can help other people so
that i can lift them up because i'm in
this evolutionary context of i get
rewarded neurochemically i get the
chills right now from just thinking
about helping other people because i'm
strong right helping somebody because i
got strong in some way not necessarily
physically but i got good at something
and that thing has now helped somebody
makes me feel good and if people are
trying to you know um brandish their
personal responsibility to become this
badass [__] and then you know
it's it's [__] you to everybody else it
won't feel good
like that is such a fragile place to
live so getting people to understand
even if you just want to be a selfish
psychopath helping other people actually
plays out neurochemically from a
selfishly rewarding place
well you have now said the first thing
that i disagree with you about all right
now push me forward i don't think we
actually disagree but um the the selfish
psychopath is such an unusual creature
that i don't even
i think the one thing to know about them
is that your intuitions about what it's
like inside that mind are
bound to be off because it's so
different yeah i will i will nod to that
was pure hyperbole yeah good all right
so then we're back on exactly the same
page and and uh it's a page i i really
like
so
when i was teaching when i was teaching
college
i was in a constant battle trying to
convey to students what it was that i
knew that they were doing but they
didn't understand was the objective of
the exercise you know they would very
frequently either have a
producer consumer model
for what they were doing
in college
you know where the the teacher is uh
delivering a good that they consume from
the seats very destructive
um
or they sort of have the sense that this
is like a proto job where they're
producing useful stuff almost nobody
produces anything useful in college
that's not the point the point is you're
you're building capacity into your mind
and that capacity you're you're
you're not being productive for let's
say four years in order that you can be
very productive in a useful way when you
get out
so upgrading the mind is the whole point
of the exercise which seems obvious once
you say it out loud but um but
nonetheless it's it's obscure to people
and the
the point about how you will deploy
those tools once you are
liberated into the world is the key you
know you want to be able to
uh
a you need to be able to sleep
right
if you are doing something that makes it
hard for you to get to sleep probably
you're not doing the right thing with
those tools and so
anyway glad glad we're on the same page
about um about personal responsibility
it's importance about capacity and uh
anyway i resonate with that
so should we get back to unity i
shouldn't have yes no
absolutely
so the question you asked was is it this
understanding of
yin yang
perspectives that led to the unity 2020
plan
partly i think so i mean the unity 2020
plan is the result of
decades of thinking about what has gone
wrong and of trying various things and
seeing what happens and in some sense
the plan is
ridiculously simple because the primary
obstacle
is
not a complex one the primary obstacle
is that each and every time you attempt
to propose something outside of the
duopoly's control
you are told if you do that you are
going to empower the thing farther from
your values and you're going to rob the
thing closer to your values therefore
you're not allowed to even think those
thoughts
and
that
is wrong
it's wrong for a number of reasons i
would give you
one example
the um the lesser evil paradox has it
that if you
if let's say ralph nader got one vote
right and the democrats lost by one vote
they would blame ralph nader
now ralph nader is not
the villain in a scenario where he gets
one vote he's perfectly entitled to get
one vote
the villain in that story is actually
the democrats who offered such a uh
a poor
candidate that they couldn't acquire
anything like 75 of the electorate the
democrats have a go-to move frankly all
they need to do if they want to be
wildly popular is serve the american
public but the problem is they're
actually involved in an objective that
is inconsistent with serving the
american public they're influenced
peddlers and so you can blame ralph
nader for the failure of the democrats
but the democrats are really responsible
for the failure of the democrats
therefore the lesser evil paradox that
you are required to vote for that thing
which is nominally closer to your values
so you don't empower the the opposite is
really it's a trap and in my opinion
it's actually a trap that has been
constructed to limit our thinking about
what might be possible
so
the unity plan
basically says look what we need in
order to fix the system is people who
are above politics who are patriotic who
are insightful and who are capable and
we need them to understand the values on
both sides the tension that exists that
makes the system so dynamic and
functional
so
you don't have to be afraid of electing
a unity ticket because you know that
your values whether you're left or right
your values will be in the room somebody
who understands what it is that you see
will be present in that discussion at
the very top level and will have
um
equal power in that discussion about
what we are to do and i truly believe
that if you did that if you simply
uh took the influence peddling out of
the white house
and you had people who were honorable
who had the resources to solicit the
best insight that they could source
and who made
a
proper judgment on what was likely to be
best for the american people i believe
you would begin to see things get better
rapidly and what's more i believe it
would cascade through the system that
there are many people in congress for
example who are trapped in a system that
forces them into influence peddling but
if they had an option to to do the job
that they were actually elected to do
they'd prefer it
so it's you know the fact that we see
rampant corruption doesn't mean
everybody's happy in that state
and
uh
frankly i don't see any reason that we
wouldn't try it right this is the best
i want to start pushing on um some of
the issues and i don't know if you're
fully um discussing things yet i know
for a while you were like hey look uh we
know the game that we're playing and if
we reveal too much we're just giving a
strategic
give to the enemy that wishes to tear
this down so um if i ask something
you're still not ready to talk about
just let me know but um
so i'm gonna start asking questions as
somebody who wants this to be true and
and i'll walk you through um what
happened so i've been apolitical my
entire life
uh the system has worked well for me so
i've never
had a problem i've just always been like
i'm gonna outwork everybody i don't give
a [__] what you try to do to slow me
down like i'm gonna keep going and
because it has worked well for me
it i don't immediately find myself
gravitating towards the problems
now andrew yang comes onto the scene
and i'm looking at i remember telling my
employees the night before the trump
election guys he cannot get elected like
he he is on tape he said i grabbed them
in the [__] it's done like
i i was so i was literally laughing i'm
like you guys are panicking he is
fundamentally unelectable it can't
happen and so i was like go to bed rest
everything's going to be fine and so the
next morning when i say that i was like
what
i i was so caught off guard and taken by
surprise he was just anyway a very
surprising moment so that was the first
time i thought whoa man maybe votes
really do count like you know that i
i should have voted i didn't vote never
even really thought i'm like i live in
california it's like it's a default you
know state it's gonna go blue so
never thought about the need to vote
never even took inventory of am i
conservative or
am i liberal none of it just didn't
think about it
as this all starts happening and the the
trump thing is kicking off and i start
with just default assumptions that he's
a psychopath and he is like literally
ruining this country
and
then yang comes around because i'm like
who am i going to vote for in the next
election because now i realize i really
do need to vote
and yang came along and i'm like yo this
dude and i was really into him and
obviously he gets sort of railroaded off
but then i had him on my podcast
and i was way opposed to lbi uh ubi ubi
and
uh when i had him on the podcast i'm
talking to him and i'm like you know man
i'm still not sure if i agree with ubi
or not but like i really believe in this
dude like and if this dude has looked at
this problem that closely and is like yo
we really have to take this into
consideration i'm just willing to say
either i need to go figure it out for
myself and do all the hardcore research
or i need to find a proxy that i can
trust and i felt so good about him so
when you came out with unity and and off
camera i told him dude you better
[__] run again next cycle because
one you look super prescient now because
this was right after covet hit um and i
just really think people are going to
get used to your way
and there could be a real shot for you
and so when you started talking unity
2020 and the people that you were
putting forth that he happened to be one
i was like oh there's r he gave me the
clear sense of what you meant by a
patriot
and okay so
that's the framework with which i'm now
stepping into the first time i hear
about unity 2020 and i think ooh this is
interesting but my first problem is tick
tock man we are running up against it
so how are you not worried about and
forget it i know you're gonna pull the
plug if we can't but i'm just saying i
really want it to happen so how do we
get enough done
in the
really small amount of time that we have
like can you even get on the ballot
everywhere
well see that's the thing everybody asks
this question
you have to realize something you
probably hadn't heard a plan like unity
2020 before in other words you've you've
probably heard the lesser evil thing a
dozen times right you've heard why you
can't engage in this and then the answer
is oh there's actually a very simple
solution to that puzzle
ballot access has this element if you
think well ballot access is a matter of
collecting signatures there's a date in
every state
and that's it then we're cooked that's
true we are cooked you can't do it that
way it's not the only way so the
question is is there something that you
are not seeing
and i can promise you there is can i
promise you that we're going to get
there oh i absolutely can't what we need
is a groundswell in order to find out
right everything depends on people
realizing what i think even in what you
just said
i think is missing which is
i don't think there's any guarantee that
something recognizable makes it to 2024
for andrew yang to run again i think
andrew yang is thinking that it does
right in fact i saw an interview
in which he
ominously said that he had signed
something that said he was going to step
out of the race
this time and not do anything
that might interfere with it
who is asking him to sign what this is a
democracy who knows what the future
holds
why would any honorable person ask
somebody who is clearly capable
qualified for the job why would you take
anybody off the map with their signature
shouldn't a handshake do it and say look
under foreseeable circumstances i'm not
planning to run shouldn't that be good
enough for just about anybody
so anyway something ominous is a foot in
our system that wishes to take
andrew out of circulation we saw it
act during the primaries right we saw
all sorts of shenanigans played in order
to to limit his influence i think it's
very clear why
you know again the democratic party does
not want to represent the public because
it has
other priorities
andrew yang would clearly represent the
public so
he's a non-starter frankly i think he'll
be a non-starter in
2024 or 2028 you know whatever it is
right the
problem within the current system
well let's put it this way why is he
behaving like a good soldier in the
current system if the current system
cannot allow andrew yang to be andrew
yang i mean
there's something just seriously off so
in any case
the um the thing about andrew yang that
i really
like and the reason that i named him as
a member the the left leaning member of
the the prototypical ticket
is that he is
uh
very insightful he's clearly motivated
by the right things to be honest with
you i'm not sure i believe in ubi as
presented but my sense is there
it's a problem that needs to be
addressed ubi is a proposal it proves
that andrew is
interested in the right things he's
focused in the right place personally i
would argue
that something like participation income
might be a better instantiation but
here's the thing i know for sure
let's say that andrew yang found himself
in the white house
there's no problem saying look ubi was a
cool idea here's why it doesn't work
here's an idea that fixes the problem
with ubi and addresses the same thing
that it addresses andrew yang would look
at it and if he thought actually that
does work better there's no obstacle to
it right he would accept it or if he
understood something about participation
income that wasn't as effective at ubi
he'd throw back that argument and we'd
find out right there's no
there's nothing in the system there's no
reason he'd be committed to it there's
no constituency that
is favoring ubi that is actually driving
his
claim to believe in it so
again it's just a simple matter of let's
let democracy work by taking people who
can afford to listen to any idea who
don't have a dog in the fight personally
who can actually
speak on our behalf so yeah andrew's
perfect for that because he's smart he's
open-minded he's a patriot
i mean hell yeah
so as we um there's some
way that you guys see that we can get on
the ballot in time when do you plan to
announce announce uh who the candidates
are and what does that is that process
of selecting those candidates something
that you
pass off or do you have to have the
unity
um the unity party that you know has
their own sort of version of the dnc
that does this like what because i i
will say
i'm i'm the guy that um you
probably are aiming at convincing right
like i'm ready i'm ready to be convinced
but right now i feel like if i wasn't
obsessed with you as a thinker
um i just wouldn't pay attention because
i don't have enough details yeah so it's
like and if i'm saying that like there's
just not enough details here so i'm just
not even going to think about it because
i go to a pessimistic place they're
never even going to be able to get on
the ballot it's just too [__] late um
and that there is hopelessness in that
but i think that that level of sort of
um
just unquestioned hopelessness right
i've i'm only processing through this
because i'm sitting in front of you now
right so otherwise i wouldn't it just
would be sort of background like oh that
would be cool but you know we're just
it's just not going to happen in time
okay how do we give the the you know the
optimism and the sense of like [__] this
could really happen
okay so
there are a couple answers to the
question one i don't think there's any
point in
actually
attempting to deliver a ticket if we
don't have the ground swell that makes
it plausible because for one thing what
it does is it actually damages the
people who we would name
right
we want them empowered in order to
empower them to
to work on our behalf
they have to be drafted
into this movement which requires the
ground swell if we don't get the ground
swell then it doesn't make sense to do
it however here's the thing that i think
you're looking for
let's say that this plan fails and we're
not on track by
uh well we can't actually say when
because we don't know how the ballots
are going to be delivered and therefore
when voting is actually going to take
place but let's say we're not on track
in time
but let's say that we have managed to
[Music]
to accumulate a movement of people that
understands that we are now rolling the
dice with all of the most dangerous
processes on earth right a
the world superpower
is now gambling
with the possibility of civil war
right we haven't even begun to talk
about what happens if we fragment not
only is there no geographical solution
that suggests itself in this case
but
um somehow we're talking about
not only a nuclear arsenal but we're
talking about
nuclear reactors that need to be
carefully managed
how
you know how is it transitioned to some
other structure in which the united
states ceases to exist going to work so
all i'm saying is the magnitude of the
danger that we are putting the world in
even before you get to the question of
what happens next if the united states
fails because we tear ourselves apart
that empowers
um china
is china the next
uh
you know poll of the of the world single
pole um you know is it going to be
russia
what happens in the absence of a
powerful united states we're putting the
world in jeopardy here so we're putting
the world in jeopardy the process seems
to be moving incredibly rapidly such
that we can have a discussion about
whether or not
there's going to be something to salvage
in 2024 or not
this is an amazing level of danger that
we are putting ourselves and the world
in in light of that it seems to me that
it makes sense for every person with
ears to hear
that predicament
to gather around well
what is the chance that we can road to
shore
why wouldn't you take a shot at
something like unity 2020 and here's the
thing if it fails to elect a ticket to
the white house it could still
cause um all of the projects that aim
for a better world
to to
collect into one we've got the open
source movement we've got the
cryptocurrency movement
um we've got makers we've got game b
right all of these things we've got idw
all of these things aim to solve
problems in the legacy world
why wouldn't they join together and
understand that in effect the entire
game is can we bring the things that
we've learned in all of these different
contexts into
a structure that has the power to
implement them or to clear the obstacles
so
in essence the answer to your question
is
whether we succeed or fail in 2020
we can succeed in creating the best hope
for the future will it be enough nobody
can guarantee that i certainly won't but
is it the best hope we've got i haven't
heard a better one so
you know what's holding us back from
just simply getting behind this idea it
doesn't carry
any ideological content that would cause
anybody to look at it and say oh that's
not
that's not me right that's it has
deliberately been pruned of ideological
content so that it can uh
it can cause these other things to
gravitate to each other and
isn't that the movement that we're
looking for one that understands
um the
uh the value of crypto and open source
and and all of these other things
i think the real answer to
the question of what's holding us back
is you don't have sex appeal yet
so like what what is going to be the
hook you know what i mean so
part and and i have not thought through
this well enough to know if what i'm
about to say is actually true or not i
feel very confident about what i just
said you lack a hook that's sexy enough
to get people i'm excited but there is
there's so much noise right now um i i
can't tell you how much my youtube
viewing habits have changed in the last
like three months it is so surreal to me
even to think um like now i'm i'm just
sort of
almost like i'm watching news right i'm
looking for things that came out right
now that are super contextual to what's
happening in this moment there's there's
a cacophony of voices um and because i
was apolitical and didn't watch news i
didn't even realize that um that news
had become kabuki theater and it's so
weird to see like if i see this same
thing being covered on cnn versus fox it
actually looks like different things
happened i mean it's so [__] bizarre
and not having an allegiance in either
direction i'm just like
this is
fundamentally problematic like if you
follow this out to its natural
conclusion
you're just more and more and more
polarized because there's this weird
friction in fact
i know i'm going a field of where i was
originally headed but this is actually
interesting so
there's a weird friction as you adopt
one narrative or the other of the same
factual thing that happened but one
narrative feels right to you feels like
you're now cheering for your team yes
they're covering it in a way that speaks
to me
there's friction in in the other one
because neither are true so the other
one isn't oh i'm getting to truth it's
you're asking me to actually adopt the
opposing team's narrative which already
didn't resonate with me on a
subconscious level anyway so now that
i'm consciously looking at it it really
feels anathema to who i am this does not
feel good i don't like this so it is far
easier to go from one interpretation to
another if both had a sincere effort to
get to the facts and one just missed
something or you know that wasn't said
as well as it could be and so you could
gravitate to oh i see this is actually
what happened cool i can make that leap
but when the sense making apparatus is
intentionally
now so deep into the world of narrative
i can't cross that divide and so that's
what scares me is
there's already people seek things that
confirm the confirmation bias confirm
what they already believe
but that's a lot less problematic when
the disc confirming evidence doesn't
trigger
some weird destruction of your identity
in the way that now it forces you to
because you have polarized
narratives
and how we
get past that and have sex appeal is
where like this starts to worry me so my
we we you cannot let me end this
interview without us talking about shut
down stem which to me when i look around
and i go okay people with guns and riots
and stuff okay that's all troubling but
the one that scares the [__] out of me
is shut down stem
and we can get into why but the
once people detach themselves from what
works
what moves you towards your goal then it
is it you you can no longer in any
effective way move forward
and that's what worries me so when i
think about what the effective way
forward here is in this moment with
unity 2020 you have to capture the
imagination of people and you're
competing against a narrative that gets
people feeling like there is a dragon to
be slayed and they're willing to run
down the streets it's intoxicating and
even if like dude i know you know mao's
china
um the the
revolution the the red guard that rose
up and you had students actually killing
teachers
and dude when i
stop and think about what i was like in
high school and this really bothered
this really bothers me
i remember when jordan peterson said
when you look back on world war ii don't
imagine yourself hiding um
you know a jewish person in your addict
think of yourself as an ss guard and i
thought oh god
but when i think about me being 16
during the uprising of the red guard i
had to put dunce caps on my teachers and
you know hit them with a stick i would
have dude because it just it felt so i
felt so right about everything at that
age
well i get that i have to say i uh i
think jordan peterson is right although
personally i've
there's not
i feel a certain amount of security that
i wouldn't have ended up an ss guard
no no that not not because i'm jewish
let's let's put me in uh you know in uh
in an
i don't know aryan skin or something
somehow there's something about
me that is uh
so
incompatible with a certain kind of
authority that i just it's important
your movements with evergreen make that
hard to argue
yeah
well anyway um let's go back to the
question of
um
sex appeal for one
here's the thing there's a saying that
i'm very fond of it's a hopi saying we
are the ones we've been waiting for
right
and i think it's just impossibly
deep
actually and so here's the thing you're
you're a guy who's trying to build a
new disney
right you're the sex appeal guy right
you know we're in danger that's part of
why we're having this conversation so
the question is what is the answer to
that i know full well that you're right
that at some level
what i have deployed reaches a certain
number of people who were ready
but it doesn't reach
a large enough group now it's not that
there's anything wrong with the idea i'm
sure of that
but you're right the question is can you
deliver it narratively in a way that
people get it instantly they understand
what it is why they have to be part of
it and it seems to me that this is the
same
the same question we were dealing with
earlier the dynamic tension that really
is where all magic comes from right
you need an idea that'll work
and you need somebody who understands
narrative and sex appeal and all of that
so that it can
uh it can live and
how do we do it
yeah as a sex appeal guy i will tell you
you're never going to get it off the
ground without real people because
you're asking me to get excited about a
faceless idea
and
um we've we're seeing now with some of
the movements going on that are creating
madness you can do it um and i think
over a long enough time period you could
get people behind this idea but if you
think about the current wave of madness
which i don't even know what name to
assign it but it started
in the 60s 70s i mean this has been
going now for 40 or 50 years and it was
a long game strategy and it's worked
really well but you talk about and this
is so important and so powerful the the
so when i public speak
my my message is almost always revolves
around
humans are the ultimate adaptation
machine and the way that you say that is
we've offloaded a lot of our abilities
not to genetics but to culture and by
putting in the software layer we're able
to change very rapidly so if i had a gun
in my head and you said dude you know
the mechanisms that are at work here
what do you do i say i need people and i
need people with personality i need
people with charisma
when barack obama came along ignore the
the effect of the policies when he got
elected man it was [__] electric and
i was over the moon i loved the slogan
um the whole notion of hope um having uh
a person you know i mean we're we're
still shouting distance from the civil
rights movement and in what was it 42
years later you have a black president i
mean i was like [__] yes man like that
was so thrilling to me and when coleman
hughes and i were talking not too long
ago i asked him like who do you think
could have led us
who what president would you want
leading us through this moment now he's
someone who's been very critical of
obama and he said obama and i was like
[__] you might be right because you know
in this weird world where moral
authority is like
you almost just have to take that off
the table and he's such a powerful
orator so you need an orator who
actually you need
a dual set of orators who i can see
actually functioning together that i
don't think they're going to get into a
stalemate that i believe have like
they're they've got that tough nut
hardcore [__] but at the same
time like we're we're gonna fight for
people and lift them up and and i have
to believe that they can coalesce and
work well together which is another fear
that if i have i'm sure many other
people have which is like dude my wife
and i run our company together now when
the lawyer set it up i said create the
ultimate divorce nightmare i do not want
51 percent i want 50 percent my wife's
going to 50 and yes that means that we
could hit loggerheads and this could all
blow up but because my highest value is
my marriage i want to send a very clear
sign to my wife i don't need authority
over you because she was like no no you
take the 51 i was like i don't need that
i'm going to be able to convince you
you're going to be able to convince me
because i want to listen to you i want
whatever best idea and in in our the
wedding sense we are both patriots we
care about this business we care about
this marriage we're both willing to do
what is right
now
finding that in two people is going to
be crazy hard but if you could find them
and then we had somebody to rally around
somebody that could inspire us give us
chills right when they're up there and
they're like because there is a
martin luther king's i had a dream
speech
put to music
dude it's unbelievable
and if we had somebody that can rally
like that
i
i will make the assumption you've read
long walk to freedom
no oh my god you're going to love it
nelson mandela long walk to freedom
[__] blew my mind and it it made me
ache for the fact that i read that after
he died
and i was just like i need to know
somebody like this so if we had a leader
look you've talked about this i'm
literally singing from your hymn book we
need
this dual pair of leaders to be
inspiring to give us the chills and it
has to happen right the [__] now which
is why i'm like how i don't see how you
pull this off i get why you're not
naming them but i don't see how you pull
it off unless you do
well in some sense i think you're
pointing to
the right answer which is
what drives this is patriotism in the
best sense of the term which means that
uh the people you're talking about have
to be willing to take the risk and i
don't think it's a huge risk i think
people in general understand that we're
in a very
tough spot and therefore anybody who
takes a shot at doing something on our
behalf is
is worth honoring even if it doesn't
work but somebody has to take the
reputational risk of saying actually you
know what long shot as this may be we're
in dire straits and uh i'm stepping up
so i guess the question is
um
if i accept your framework and i think
your framework is uh largely accurate
then maybe
maybe it's time i don't think it's so
hard to find people who could inhabit
the role we have a list of people on
both left and right who i think
make for compelling pairs
the question is is anybody ready to step
up in a dangerous moment without uh
without the guarantee that uh
the ground swell will emerge in other
words are they willing to precede the
groundswell rather than follow it all
right well now now i'm going to be um
god is it's possible that what i say i
will ultimately think was not wise but
i'm going to say it anyway
[Music]
courage is precisely what we need and
there
there is nothing more
exciting for me than somebody who is
like look yeah this is this is very
dangerous to my career but i actually
believe it
and because i believe it like i'm
willing to die on that hill like my
thing is i i'm always
when i really have conviction on
something and first of all i have strong
convictions loosely held right if like
the example you gave with
ubi and
um yang it i think that's very apt and
that was exactly what drew me to yang
was it felt like um if he
saw something that was oh yeah that's
more effective like he just wouldn't
miss a beat he would be like cool let's
get behind the more effective idea
that to me
finding candidates that have the courage
despite any sort of huge safety net to
step up and do nobody knows that
more than you how scary it is and i
cannot tell you i've looked at what
happened at evergreen
and brett
without you to show me the way i don't
know that i would have been
the person to have the the guts
it's not that i wouldn't have been able
to think through it as clearly as you
and so without your guidance on a frame
that i could because intuitively i knew
something was wrong but i wouldn't be
able to articulate it like you can and
so
if we can get leaders that can
articulate it and show us the courageous
move and inspire us and give us chills
and leave us in awe
then i think you'll you'll get that
groundswell and i don't this is a lot of
words around one simple sentence
you have to we have to demand of them
the courage to step up right now or
they're not it will never work
yeah i think you're right i think you're
right and i uh
i accept the formulation and i'm going
to
i'm going to figure out how to apply it
because i agree at some level
i think
it is a demonstration of the exact
characteristics that are necessary in
the people who could do the job if
elected so in some sense it's the test
case
yeah that that seems true um so we'll
set that aside i'm super excited uh
about that
the thing that scares me going back to
shut down stem
i'll tell you a story that i think will
make you laugh because of
uh both the the
what i end up on is so universal that it
it does not need to be created it only
needs to be uncovered and then the fact
that i could be at this age in the year
2020 and not have been aware of it so in
business
business is [__] hard people go broke
all day long and actually
building something that works is
is unimaginably difficult so when you
get to a point where you're like dude
this is all systems i can teach these
systems to people i had a realization at
one point you're only as good as what
you can write down so i thought cool i'm
going to give to my staff
exactly how to make progress and my
whole thing is first principles thinking
so you i call it the physics of progress
and the reason i call it the physics of
progress is i'm saying there's nothing
below this there you can't reduce it any
further
and but i had never articulated it in my
own head i knew how to do it i just had
never stopped to write it down so i was
like okay what is this all right
everything starts with your goal cool
where are you trying to get to then you
have to identify the problem that stands
the impediment that stands between where
you are now and the goal that you're
trying to achieve the end state that you
want to exist at okay well you have to
create an informed hypothesis about how
to
overcome that goal and that informed
hypothesis by its nature has to include
levers basically actions binary things
you either do or do not do so that you
can run the experiment and then there
needs to be data that you look at which
nine times out of ten you can identify
the data ahead of time that you're going
to judge whether this was a success or
not and so then you run the experiment
and then you look at the data and you
analyze it and then that's almost never
going to have gotten you all the way to
where you wanted to go but it gives you
more information you have a
better informed hypothesis and now you
can run another test and so you repeat
right you analyze the data and you
repeat and so i call this the physics of
progress i give it to my team and one of
the guys on the team was like oh the
scientific method
and i was like what do you mean and he
was like he pulls something up on the
internet and he reads it off dude oh
almost verbatim it was like the
scientific method and i was like oh my
god this is hilarious
but made me feel much better that you
really have reduced it down to
as far down as it's going to go like i
mean this this just is the nature of the
world and how it works so
now here i am railing in my company i'm
teaching it in the class the physics of
progress i'm like look this is just a
scientific method recontextualized for
business uh and then
you know
all of a sudden i see this and and when
i'm doing it by the way what i'm trying
to convey to people is this is just the
way it works like there's no i'm not
being fancy i didn't invent something
i've you know
brushed dirt off of something that is
inherent and
then i saw shut down stem and i was like
oh here we go
um
why you're the only person i've heard
bring it up a and b why are you worried
about shut down stem
um
i agree with you it is absolutely the
most terrifying piece of this um it's
also the most absurd piece but i think
the reason that it is so terrifying is
that it speaks to a willingness
to
[Music]
uninvent
insight
in order to make progress
right and that tells you what kind of
progress they want to make
so
to the extent that one is willing to
take a tool as universal as the
scientific method
and to critique it a to declare it
some sort of a
uh
a european thing right to declare it
white in order to
nullify
its power to speak
is um
i mean i guess i guess i know exactly
what it is
it's plato's cave and you know you
started uh talking about the matrix and
plato's cave is the matrix
and the thing about the
the
matrix in plato's cave is
the desire
of
most people many people
some important force
not to be enlightened
right that there's something that is
served
by you know the killing of the person
who's seen what's outside the cave when
they come back and try to report that's
the
the most frightening process of all and
those of us who have tried to convey
something about the danger that we are
in
know that there is this
um
this
force of resistance that is very
powerful that wants to kill the
messenger in order to keep doing what
it's doing and
uh to hear it spelled out i mean
that
we are fighting about so many things
which are just simply unambiguous that
five years ago you would think there's
no way we're ever going to have an
analytical argument about whether or not
men and women are effectively the same
thing right because everybody everybody
knows that they're not the same thing
right and then to find yourself there
and to find yourself trying to fend off
arguments that make no sense
tells you that there is some
that the momentum behind this is not
driven
by
any sort of analysis it is driven by
just a
naked desire for power and i think the
thing is
we know how that ends we don't
necessarily know who the winners and
losers are but it ends with something of
which we will all be terribly ashamed
and
spell out why that's true i agree
aggressively but i want i want you to
say why that's true
um so i've been thinking a lot about
this of late
and it occurred to me at one point that
the united states is special and it's
special because it attempts to do
something that i know is possible but is
very very difficult which is to step out
of the normal evolutionary dynamic and
do something better so the normal
evolutionary dynamic has us cooperating
on the basis of our relatedness the same
reason that you know you uh will aid
your kids
before you aid somebody else's kids
works at a population level which means
that a kind of
racism is wired into us as the default
mode of uh of cooperation and conflict
the united states aims to set aside
those population level differences to
foster a cooperation based on something
else you know it's in some weird sense
it is
the the christian insight of um
you know the story of the good samaritan
that relatedness is not the basis on
which we should uh view each other
favorably that there is something to be
gained by
being inclusive empathically inclusive
and collaborating because it makes us
stronger
the problem is as great an idea as that
obviously is i mean it's been incredibly
contagious the number of countries that
have followed our example and you know
modeled themselves on
on our pattern
is stunning
for us to
instead of completing the project
instead of actually bringing ourselves
to a place where opportunity is evenly
distributed to go in reverse and
to reinvigorate the
population against population conflict
means that effectively all there will be
in the end
is
power and the limits of compassion will
be genetically defined and that is the
recipe in which you find
people genociding each other or
cooking up reasons to go to war across
the border whatever it is it's it's
uninteresting to be sure
it is
shameful to return there after having
discovered that something else
is possible and i just
i can't imagine why anybody
is going to be surprised that the
outgrowth of putting race first is going
to be
um
you know
i mean maybe leonard cohen got it i've
seen the future brother it's murder
i really hope not you said something not
too long ago that um
was both hilarious and
uh it made me work it's exactly what
people aren't doing you said i want to
emphasize one word people
extrapolate
and i was like yes yes please like
follow that logic to its natural
conclusion and that sums up why i am
freaked out by um them coming after stem
because it was uh
the one thing that i held on to was okay
if you just get people to follow their
own logic you realize how problematic it
gets and they would have to do away with
logic altogether and they're never gonna
wait what and it's like they're actually
getting rid of logic it's the the moment
in the argument where you're like i'm
not even gonna say anything i'm just
gonna ask questions because i know if
once i ask a certain number of questions
they will get to the point where they
realize oh [__] i actually okay cool i
see where this goes
because it never occurs to you that they
would actually throw out
um
measuring progress
having a goal seeing if you're actually
getting towards that goal like and so
when they start going yeah like the the
second most disturbing thing to come out
of all of this was the um smithsonian
like these are all the things that are
white and are there for problematic and
it was like hard work progress measuring
results striving to be the best i was
like what the [__] is happening you you
literally i have
so i have to get into a little bit of my
story you know a smidgen of it um so
when you're working in manufacturing
which is where i was working you're in
the inner city so you're around only
people of color i mean almost
exclusively and so i'm encountering all
these people and i'm like okay tom are
your ideas real because you always say
it doesn't matter who you are today it
only matters who you want to become and
the price you're willing to pay to get
there well if that's true tom then you'd
be willing to hire convicted felons
would you not
and i was like yeah actually i would and
so we put out on the street as they call
it that we would hire people we would
consider people for employment even if
they had a felony record and so
we ended up getting all of these like
way low income people that had really
struggled had trouble the law former
drug dealers gang bangers like guys with
the teardrop tattoos and all that
and i was not everybody but i was very
impressed with the number of people who
were extraordinary people incredibly
capable um able to do stuff they just
had a weird ass frame of reference and
if i could give them an empowering frame
of reference then you know they could go
on to do something and walking them down
the line of like hey here's how you
improve something you have a goal you
set it you have a metric that you're
marching towards
that just seemed
if you can get them on that path then
you've really got something that's going
to take you somewhere impactful but once
you strip away that ability and you say
hey that's white um and so you don't
want to act white or be white i'm like
the one thing you've given me that's
allowing me to help these people like we
had one guy he went from he took the job
because he wanted a front for his drug
money okay imagine that he comes in he
interviews because he hears this crazy
guy is willing to hire people with
felony convictions he had been to prison
not for drugs oddly enough but he had
been to prison for something else
and then was dealing again and but had
to show his parole officer where he was
getting the money so and he tells me all
this to my face later once we've been we
had gained trust with each other and he
was like dude you've changed my life
you've changed the lives of my kids like
this is going to echo for generations
there was one guy that called me i
hadn't spoken him probably in six years
he called me this a few weeks ago he's
like tom i'm on my way to a job getting
paid almost a hundred thousand dollars i
would never have believed this was
possible and i just had to thank you and
i was like this this is why
instead of buying an island and retiring
like i've doubled down in my life
because i i see the number of people
that oh change my frame of reference i
didn't get smarter i just look at things
differently i'm using metrics like i
have a goal because that was my whole
thing to them you have a goal and my
thing i always preach is do and believe
about yourself that which moves you
towards your goals right so if because a
lot of people get stuck in these loops
if i'm stupid i'm dumb the world's
against me whatever and so i'm like does
that belief help you achieve your goal
no cool then don't don't buy into it
even if the world really is against you
even if the deck really is stacked
against you
accepting defeat does not move you
towards your goal so don't do it and so
when i read that and i was like what are
you doing like you were stripping people
of the most powerful possible tools by
saying there the tools themselves are
somehow corrupt because of who
quote-unquote created i'm like this
[__] madness it either works or it
doesn't
yeah it's it's crazy
heather and i have uh
long wondered about this audrey lord
quote about uh you can't take apart the
master's house with the master's tools
and it's just the most
disempowering viewpoint
i'm not even entirely sure what she
meant but the way this is understood
it just takes
the most powerful things at
that human disposal and keeps them in
the hands of those who
have had them longest i mean it's just
it inverts the process of
of ending oppression and it's hard to
imagine why
anybody who sees their objective as
ending oppression would embrace this you
should
you should want to capture those tools
and you should want to learn to wield
them as effectively as you possibly can
right the tools
don't know who's wielding them they work
because they work and if you're going to
rule out things uh that work because of
who discovered them first and i'm not
even sure it is who discovered them
first but who you know our collective
narrative says discovered them first
then you're just you're never gonna get
anywhere so yes it is
incredibly frightening to hear people go
up against
logic and science
um and
you know the funny thing is
evergreen did allow
us to have these conversations up close
and personal
and so
i think a lot of people dismiss the idea
that people are against stem people in
this movement are against it because
they haven't heard somebody say it while
looking into their eyes oh yes science
really is a white thing it's like what
are you even
did you just say that i mean that's
almost all i need to know about your
proposal for the world is that you just
don't understand even the basics of
you know where liberation would come
from right
so
yeah i wish i wish i could convey that
better i'm glad somebody heard me say
extrapolate and knew what i meant
because i really
very interesting
it's the missing parameter if you just
take what you know to be factual and
extrapolate from it you can see where
we're headed and
it couldn't be more frightening it it
really couldn't be more frightening and
staying on the notion of um one thing
that bothers me is people are always
looking for a reason not to listen to
somebody and so i i have beliefs and i
wrote these beliefs a very long time ago
so they have nothing to do with the
current moment like you said that they
are the things that have worked in my
life and i wrote them down so i could
give them to other people um because i
really am obsessed with equal
opportunity
and that's been a passion of mine now
for
more than a decade and look i've made
moves in my life that i will say put me
beyond reproach in terms of
like i said hiring you know former
felons or
felons but
no longer in prison and just putting my
money where my mouth is and you know
seeing what happens
and it really
i find a disturbing trend that people
jump to any reason they have not to
learn from somebody so i mean it
obviously extrapolate it becomes cancel
culture and
i was given an example yesterday and i
thought this actually really
um it it is the trap that i would be
curious to see how somebody who has this
ideology um would handle it so let's say
that you have a daughter somehow worse
if it's a little girl for me anyway you
have a daughter and she is um
in anaphylactic shock her throat has
closed
and you call 9-1-1
and the most vile and despicable person
in the world
answers that call but they know how to
perform an in-field tracheotomy and so
they can save your daughter
do you hang up the phone and try to find
somebody else who you agree with and
you'd be willing to take their advice
which in my opinion makes you an even
more despicable person because you're
now making your child suffer and the
risk of death you know is now
skyrocketing
or do you say i don't give a [__] that
you are the most despicable person on
earth you have a piece of information
that actually gets me something that i
need and that i want and
my thing is dude i i
it is a litmus test from which i will
say i can't understand
i can't understand your world view like
your value system is so divorced from
mine and i'll say mine is probably like
if you boiled my value system down to
just its basic basic basic irreducible
building block it's
do things that alleviate human suffering
it's going to be something like that
that's sort of the the thing below that
like if somebody disagrees with that
then i i'm at a loss now i no longer how
to communicate i don't know how to
communicate so
that argument to me is is the sort of
ultimate extrapolation of i'm trying to
shut that person down because they're a
bad person i don't want to hear their
ideas my thing is look if there were two
people in front of me and one was a
despicable person and the other was
somebody who inspired me
and i thought they were amazing and they
both have the same information of course
i'm going to gravitate towards the
person
even in subtle ways of rewarding them
with my thanks and praise and and you
know i have chosen them and of course
that will feel good for them i get why i
would want to lavish people who i really
believe in with that so cool all things
being equal i get it we're all going to
self-select to you know celebrating
things and people that we like but
shutting down learning something and now
this brings you to like
if unity 2020 is is the concept that
you're just one of the things you really
want to get out there one of the things
i'm most desperate to get people to
understand like to really understand at
a visceral level it's that skills have
utility
they let you do things and you don't
read a book to
check a mark off you don't go to college
to impress your parents you
take architecture classes so you can
build a bridge that doesn't fall down
and once you understand that and that if
you can do something other people can't
do like you've now just moved humanity
forward or you're a small group forward
like
that [__] is real and uh when i say that
i i don't see like this recognition in
people's eyes of like hey the point of
learning something is to actually be
able to do
something and so my my new thing is to
get people to understand your mind is
not a library your mind is a laboratory
and once you realize ah the point of
this knowledge is to run tests against
it to see what actually allows me to
influence the world and my obsession is
power let that echo and let lightning
strike and sinister noise play
because whenever i tell people that i
come seeking power people get freaked
the [__] out until i say let me define
power for you power is the ability to
close your eyes
imagine a world a world better than this
one
and then open your eyes and be able to
make that world come true because it's
going to require you to do things
and if you don't have the skill set to
do those things you are disempowered so
yeah
getting people to understand that feels
like an uphill battle sometimes
no i it's beautiful and i resonate with
it a hundred percent
and in some sense i think what's
happened is we've so badly botched the
job of educating people that they
register in some sense that it's too
late
and so
the
mind-numbing prescriptions that were
being delivered
i think are surrender that basically
people who understand
that they have been
effectively cognitively maimed
are not really interested in the idea
that the right way to solve the problem
is to
to increase the capacity of your mind to
find new possibilities and bring them
into the world
um so instead it's the temper tantrum
that you started with
which you know
i get it we can't do that but i get it i
understand
that they're they're angry
and
they have a right to be
all right
i want to shift gears because i would be
horrified if i had an evolutionary
biologist uh two hours with them and i
did not ask a question that has been on
my mind since i was like 15.
brett is weird as this question is it
actually means something to me and i ask
it in all sincerity why is the clitoris
on the outside
well okay this is a good question
um let's put it this way i don't think
the focus should be on
the anatomical structure right there's
bound to be an answer to that
let's put it this way the fact that
testicles are on the outside is also an
interesting oddity
but let's say the interesting thing
is that selection has altered the
meaning of sex for humans right it has
delivered us an incredible gift which we
are now treating
so
horrifyingly but the gift is
it has turned sex into
a
bonding mechanism
and what that means is that unlike
almost all creatures human beings have
sex when
the production of offspring is not a
possibility
that is to say people have sex after
menopause they have sex when it's not
the fertile moment in a woman's cycle
and
that i think people don't understand how
unique a situation that is and what it
implies is that human bonding
is a
a novel phenomenon that requires both
parties to feel rewarded by the activity
so in some sense
the orgasm has been
democratized by selection
and a mechanism for generating it has
been
provided by adaptation
and interestingly the mechanism for
generating it
is not it's not a simple button right
right it's just not a simple button it
actually requires an empathic connection
in order to to tune in to your partner
well enough
to deliver the goods and in some sense
that's the magic of the thing is
by creating a puzzle
surrounding
sexual gratification in women
the
necessity of
a close connection is
is introduced into pair bonding
is that making sense it is i have a
loaded question uh waiting if that is
the natural break point so um my
question is
it
am i wrong in assuming that for
literally thousands of years and maybe
far longer than that
that um
it was neglected and that generation
after generation after generation of
women failed to have
a
life where orgasm was a regular part of
it
due to that which if that's the case it
it does not seem that evolution would
land on that as a strategy it may be a
byproduct maybe a total accident but it
seems that it probably isn't a strategy
unless and this was i can't remember
where i read this and it was so
interesting to me that i thought could
this really be true that it was put on
the outside so that women it wasn't like
if you think of the penis as a a very um
it's external it's easily
touched by anybody who wants to bond and
certainly in other animals you'll see it
isn't just the person that they're i'm
having intercourse with that will reach
out and touch them what in a way that we
would call sexual as a way to ease
tension or whatever and so i thought is
this a way of putting something on the
outside so that women also have
just a social bonding a way to soothe or
you know
extend sort of an olive branch of kinds
you know between two people could be
male
male female could be female female
and that it needed to be on the outside
to be more easily
accessible well that's a really
interesting question i don't know of any
evidence to support it i will say i am
doubtful
that
the orgasm in females was
it may be true that in european culture
for example it was um
it was turned taboo and therefore
a kind of uh
you know generating orgasm for females
is kind of a lost art but i think in
many other cultures it's quite clear
that there was an awareness of
the subtleties of sexual pleasure for
females so in any case if europeans
really did lose touch with uh with
female orgasm i believe that's an
anomaly it probably has a meaning to it
in other words there are
um
it is true that the structures that
exist are adaptations and it is true
that religious prohibitions against
their access are also evolutionary
adaptations and so there's a question
about what what is being managed by
these these tensions
um
but i love the idea that placing it on
the outside means that it is not
strictly speaking a
a an intercourse triggered phenomenon
that of course raises questions about
the g-spot and
its location but anyway it's an
interesting it's an interesting line of
questioning i understand why you're
obsessed with it it's fascinating and
clearly selection had something in mind
um i will say the fly in the ointment of
this discussion might be
one of anatomical constraint
in other words because the clitoris is
made of the same tissue that the penis
is made of it may be that its position
is actually um constrained by the amount
of shared blueprint that male and female
have in terms of where tissues end up so
i i don't know
that is super interesting
um
there is certainly some logic to that
but the um so
in terms of the design of the clitoris
if i'm not
mistaken there are
um elements of the
uh the nerve that wraps around um the
vaginal canal which that always made
more sense because then at least it
seems like it's sort of in on the act
and shows that that
you could put theoretically those
tendrils anywhere and that one would
assume that nature ran some sort of
experiment where there was more
involvement um you know on because there
are some women at least as i understand
it there are some percentage of women
that can have orgasm from
traditional uh penetrative sex so it
becomes um
you know a question of why
if we think of that as sort of an
experiment that nature ran why did it
not go all the way why did it hit some
uh percentage of women but not all
especially if and i am sort of making
the base assumption that women are more
likely to get pregnant if they also have
an orgasm
um there is actually data on this i'm
trying to remember what the conclusion
is
i
you can't hold me to this it's possible
i have it wrong but i think if i'm
remembering it correctly
the result was that orgasm did increase
the likelihood of fertilization
[Music]
if one controls for
fertile period right for the place in a
woman's cycle that sex is taking place
i hope that's correct um that's
certainly what i encountered um i am by
no means an expert on the subject but
that was the one that made me go wow
that this is so interesting then why are
the two divorced like it just seems so
strange to me
well but in some sense i think that's
reflective of the the answer i gave you
initially which is
um
there's a tremendous amount about
courting
and
other associated rituals which um
now become things like marriage and
engagement
in in humans
that is built to ensure that
males don't game females
in other words fema
so females have a tremendous investment
in offspring automatically just by
virtue of carrying them internally and
then feeding them
by breast
males
can have a very high investment in
offspring and that's a very frequent way
for males to reproduce but they
obviously can have an almost no
investment version of the strategy which
although it's less successful because
raising offspring without a father is
more difficult
it is such a bargain from the point of
view of males that males find the
prospect of it irresistible
right this is why males are obsessed
with
um
sex with women that they don't have any
intention of
seeing again
so
in light of that females are
built they are both wired and programmed
to avoid men who are resistant to
commitment
and
so the point is in some sense the
conception of a child with a man who is
diligent about delivering sexual
pleasure is liable to be
that's a more secure bond than sex with
a man who's only interested in his own
pleasure so you could imagine wow the
system would
when that makes sense
that that is super [__] interesting
now that that's 4d chess right there
like all right let's let's see how far
you're willing to go to make sure that
i'm taken care of as well jesus
that is [__] interesting man
that is really interesting
yeah i am well
yeah go ahead no no please i want to
learn more here well i was just you know
say you know that uh
that this all raises this issue of how
frivolously we are treating sex and how
stupid it is because in some sense
you know we we could have been given no
greater gift than a
weirdly yin-yang symmetrical sexual
landscape that you spend a lifetime
exploring with somebody i mean that's
just
it'd be hard to make up something that
wonderful and we're treating it just so
stupidly dude this is where you know
going back to the data becomes so
interesting because um one like the
moment that i just had where you gave me
something that i i had a whole sort of
belief around like why the taurus is on
the outside and i could tell it at
cocktail parties and always gets a big
reaction and you came along you gave me
something that like totally knocks that
off and is like even more interesting
and it's like man that's i love those
moments right but it's an empirical
question you know ultimately you can
look at the data and find out which
one's real and like whoa that's real and
then really beginning to understand it
like begins to you know peel back the
onion as it were and so even looking at
sex and monogamy and the different types
of pair bonding that we have and how
they can change from one environment to
the next and why that like once you're
able to look at the data and say like i
never would have guessed i've heard
people say there's like three things you
have to do to succeed in america i may
get these wrong if you know them please
tell me
that i'm wrong but i think they are
don't
get
don't have a child out of wedlock
get a high school diploma and get a job
it's something like that like these
really basic three things all but
guarantee you entrance into the middle
class
and it's one of those look at the data
and thomas sol is somebody that blew my
mind when all of this kicked off and it
was like
i had some
weird unease that black lives matter
wasn't about actually
helping black people but i didn't know
enough about it so i was like uh
i didn't want to post black lives matter
but i was like i need to go research
this and figure out what's going on
and so i went on like this binge where i
was like i'm only going to seek out
um black intellectuals and see where
they fall and it introduced me to some
of the greatest minds thomas soule to me
in a subconscious way when i look at him
i see
he might as well be wearing a superman
outfit like when you hear that guy talk
he's so smart in a way that i'm so
covetous of and he's so well researched
it is crazy and whenever somebody
debates him he's always like show me the
data
like i will follow the data wherever it
goes i don't have some agenda that i'm
trying to push i'm just telling you you
want this thing to to win because it
feels so good and he was like but if you
look at the data and it doesn't win then
don't you want to find the thing that
wins
and that to me is just so powerful of
like data data data man like there is an
answer
and if you have the
discipline of not tying your identity up
into an answer and you stay open to
um you know new truth it's like and you
might know i misquote this person all
the time i think it was max planck who
said science advances one funeral at a
time
yeah funeral by funeral and and i just
thought oh my god why why how do you not
read that quote and go oh i have to
change everything about myself because i
refuse to to fall for something so
predictable
yeah i agree and i think the point you
were you were headed toward a minute ago
where
um the black lives matter movement is
explicitly
anti-nuclear family but this is this is
again one of these issues of look if
you're going to attack science and
you're going to declare it white and
you're going to say the nuclear family
is white and that therefore we have to
uninvent these things
you can't you cannot have power if you
have power over us you'll destroy us
because you're taking things that are
actually
um part of our birthright and you're
declaring them null and void
either you know that's insane and you
have an ulterior motive or you don't
know it's insane and you need to figure
out how to think more clearly because
this is just nuts
absolutely nuts yeah when people don't
look at the data i get super super
super uneasy
that one really feels like a recipe for
disaster so really fast um just i'm
super curious how do you think this
plays out like your predictions on where
we were going back when this was just
evergreen were spot on
your testimony in front of congress spot
on
what what comes next where where are we
headed in very specific terms
well i think
uh
it's very hard to be specific because
you have a kind of
fork that we can't tell which branch
we're going to end up on
it's possible that events cause
the election to go
towards trump which i think is far more
likely than people imagine based on
current polling
one we should have learned our lesson in
2016 about polls and trump that they
don't tell the full story and two this
is 2020 and events
even if you uh take the power of the
presidency out of the question
events could turn things around inside
of a week
so
that could happen but in light of the
powers of the presidency
i don't see
trump
allowing himself to go to a stunning
defeat
without
dramatic moves on his part to reverse
that and i fear what he might do to
avoid it
on the other hand
let's say nothing happens
in 2020 and
the president
resists the urge to
to do something dramatic
biden somehow
wins
then we haven't even more frightening
prospect potentially which is not more
of the same
but something brand new which is the
democratic party having partnered
with the
uh the black lives matter movement where
it actually takes some of the insanity
that they've been
saying and turns it into policy which i
think is quite plausible because
the
uh the purpose of the democratic party
has become the protection of those
rent-seeking elites that it
that it represents
and this is the moment at which
rent-seeking elites
are
facing something like the french
revolution and so directing
uh the people at each other so that they
ignore the folks who have hoarded the
opportunity is a natural move this is a
new twist on it but it's a familiar
pattern of history so
anyway i guess what i would say is
there's a reason
that um
that i really think we have to be
looking at something like unity 2020
which is
both prospects are
absolutely dire and the fact that we
have a system that not only delivers you
unacceptable possibilities but delivers
them in pairs in which there's no escape
that that uh it's completely
unacceptable and i think we have to take
up arms against it metaphorically
speaking
as somebody who doesn't want to hoard
opportunity
but has literally no
um idea like i don't feel like i'm
hoarding opportunity i feel like i am
desperately trying to get more people
too but when i hear you say that i
always feel like he knows something i
don't he's talking about something that
i don't quite understand
how are people hoarding opportunity and
how can somebody like myself not hoard
opportunity
well first of all you don't sound to me
like you're hoarding opportunity to the
extent that you might be it's it's
buried in your portfolio somewhere um
but i don't think you're actively doing
it um but what does the active hoarding
look like
well let's put it this way um there is a
reason that our public schools suck
right it never gets stated which is that
a large number of people
do not want other people's children
equipped to compete with their own
children
right
are people really that sort of
weak-minded is that is that conscious i
think oh god this is terrible but i do
worry that there are a lot of
well-meaning people that just aren't
they don't they don't cross a certain
threshold of being able to think through
the problem
um i think the problem is that that's
the real answer to why the schools are
so bad but it is not the answer to how
it is recorded in the mind in other
words we create a phony ideological
difference about how to fix the schools
that prevents them from being fixed
which results effectively in
people with means
opting out of public schools which
increases the problem because it means
that sabotage of the public schools
basically
externalizes the problem of
educational malpractice onto some
populations and not others
and so anyway a lot of things look like
this where there's a solution to a
problem we could find it if we agreed
that the problem was to be solved but
there's a kind of cryptic
sabotage that takes hold because of the
kind of competition we are in with each
other you know we could make the same
argument about
why there's so much homelessness
right why do we not solve the
homelessness problem
well in part the homelessness problem is
the
bottom of a ladder
where
depressing wages all the way along is a
feature not a bug
right you depress wages by having people
below you whatever rung you're on there
always people below you who would be
more than happy to take your job which
reduces your bargaining power and trying
to negotiate for for more and so
in essence
the uh
the homelessness problem is the symptom
we can't avoid seeing it's it's an
outgrowth of a system that is designed
to do something it never states
and you know there are a lot of these
things and
as you know
my sense is
if you put good people in power and you
give them the opportunity not to have to
pander to corrupting influences these
problems aren't so difficult to solve
but if you leave the corrupting
influences in a position to veto
everything you'll never get anywhere all
right so let's just take one thing and
see if we agree on what the problem is
i'll state what i think the solution is
and you punch me in the throat
uh if if i um if i'm missing something
because i what i'm about to say i mean
very very sincerely um but it is also
possible that i'm delusional in a way
that i'm i just don't see um so
my mom works for a school and she'll
occasionally tell me stories about like
and she's not even saying it like she
doesn't have a problem with it but i
hear it and i think this is madness like
the fact that there are teachers in some
school districts that are
they're accused of some pretty um insane
[__] whether it's just like gross
incompetence or
potentially doing you know
things with students that cross a
potential sexual line and they're just
shuttled off to a room somewhere where
they continue to get paid and receive
their benefits because the um unions are
so strong that you can't it is so hard
to get rid of even a horrendous teacher
that you can't um it's just better to
put them in a room and keep paying them
and then slot somebody else into that
now as a business person i can just tell
you that is a recipe for disaster you
will have so much money being spent on
the dumbest [__] ever and you don't have
a way of encouraging like this is an
area where you want there to be a
hierarchy you want people like if i
could and some universities actually do
this if i could create a hierarchy a
leader board so people could see who are
the teachers killing it the teachers
i don't know what the criteria would be
fair enough that's going to be for
somebody more invested but like student
ratings test scores like outside audit
something where it's like yo here are
the people that are actually killing the
game and then here are the people that
rank lower um for instance ray dalio
largest hedge fund manager in the world
um does these things where he
has his employees do a force ranking of
say managers and the whole company will
rate the managers and and they put it up
for everyone to see and you see who's at
the top and who's at the bottom ouch
that [__] hurts but like it inspires you
to get better because you don't want to
be at the bottom rung or you say i want
to go work for a company that doesn't do
this but either way you're getting rid
of the people at the bottom and you
bring fresh blood in so my thing is look
you cannot be in a situation where
either and i don't know if it's school
vouchers is what it's going to be
but if a school is underperforming
either the people teaching
administrators whatever they've got to
go or the union's got to go something's
got to give so that like real talent can
rise um
why am i wrong
um you're not wrong except that you're
trying to save a system that's probably
beyond help
right go on
so look the incentives have to line up
that's the thing if you're going to pay
people to sit in a room because they've
misbehaved or because they're terrible
at their job then obviously you're going
to accumulate some you know just
parasitic class of people in the system
who are just going to draw a paycheck
for nothing
that's not a viable plan
on the other hand there's a reason
that schools are terrible that has a lot
to do with the fact that somehow we have
allowed the market to set the wages of
the teachers
when in fact we ought to be subsidizing
this so that great people want to do it
and maybe not permanently so if i was to
try to fix the system i would probably
try to encourage people to spend a
period of time
teaching
to discover a if they were really good
at it but also to attract people who
were really good at something else in
other words
being really good
um
as a teacher
is partially about knowing something if
you've set your sights on being a
teacher rather than knowing something
worth teaching then you're probably off
track so we we should want to attract
people who are really good at
you know math physics art
whatever it is so that they have a
passion coming in and the problem is the
way the system is structured we don't
attract very many people who have a
passion and frankly those few who come
in there do so
doing themselves massive economic harm
right their passion drives them to just
effectively uh sideline themselves from
the market in order to do this passion
and then what do we do is we hobble them
with curriculum that's just absolutely
you know authoritarian and draconian
which leaves them almost no freedom to
engage this passion so we drive out the
good ones
this is not a stable system and it
misunderstands the purpose of education
right the purpose of education should be
to upgrade the mind so it's maximally
capable and the way to do that is to
figure out
who knows something has a passion for
conveying it
and
how do we bring them on board and give
them the freedom to figure out how to
convey it
one of the things that was true about
evergreen which um
it's just killing heather and me that we
can't manage to convey the importance of
this to people is that we had
total freedom to teach
however we wanted teach whatever
material we wanted now lots of people
abuse that freedom you don't want those
people you want to figure out how to
eliminate them quickly but for anybody
who actually has a passion to figure out
what can be conveyed
having a blank canvas is magic so
you want the freedom to use it and you
want a system that gets rid of people
who will abuse it and if you can do
those two things then you'll end up
having a marvelous educational system
far better than what you would get if
you just simply tried to rescue this one
by getting rid of the worst teachers
all right one problem solved man and
that is probably the place to wrap this
up dude the way that you're moving in
the world i am beyond grateful i can
only imagine how difficult um evergreen
was but the fact that it freed you up uh
to do something like this and to reach
the number of people that you're
reaching man it is incredible i can only
imagine where you're gonna be in five
years as more and more people
glom on to the way that you think i even
love your dad jokes by the way so keep
them coming uh the the
my wife in fact this is something we
didn't record but my wife when she heard
you were coming on had to come say hello
to you she is so into you and your wife
and and just shares my feeling as well
which you guys are really extraordinary
so thanks for coming on
sharing with us for doing what you do
i'm way way way grateful
thanks tom uh i must say i feel like
i've just spent two hours with the
kindred spirit and uh
glad to have met you dude definitely
where can people find you and uh get a
similar chance to hang out
well there's the dark horse podcast
which is uh twice a week
um
there's
twitter you can find me at brett
weinstein brett has one t
unity2020 you can look us up at articles
of unity on twitter
and uh that's probably the best places
for the moment perfect all right guys
dive into his world you will be richly
rewarded and if you haven't be sure to
subscribe here and until next time my
friends be legendary take care once you
become convinced that you're not
actually in the real world the stories
that are being fed to you are manifestly
untrue that the entire
social construction
is not what it appears to be that there
are hidden passages trapdoors panic
rooms everywhere it becomes pretty
addictive because you can't imagine that
you never noticed this before